TWIR 17.04.2026 (#650)
rails/website: _posts/2026-04-17-this-week-in-rails.markdown

---
layout: post
title: "Query command for database queries and more"
categories: news
author: Wojtek
og_image: assets/images/this-week-in-rails.png
published: true
date: 2026-04-17
---

> Hi, [Wojtek](https://x.com/morgoth85) here. Let's see what's new in the Rails on this finally sunny day (at least in this part of Earth ;-)

Reviewer: maybe? 🤔
```suggestion
Hi, [Wojtek](https://x.com/morgoth85) here. Let's see what's new in Rails on this finally sunny day (at least in my corner of the world ;-)
```

[Query command for read-only database queries](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57156)  
Adds *rails query* — a read-only database query command with structured JSON output.

```bash
rails query "Account.where(plan: 'premium').limit(2)"
```

```json
{
  "columns": ["id", "name", "plan", "created_at"],
  "rows": [
    [1, "Acme", "premium", "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z"],
    [2, "Widgets Co", "premium", "2025-03-22T14:00:00Z"]
  ],
  "meta": {
    "row_count": 2,
    "query_time_ms": 4.2,
    "page": 1,
    "per_page": 100,
    "has_more": false,
    "sql": "SELECT \"accounts\".* FROM \"accounts\" WHERE \"accounts\".\"plan\" = 'premium' LIMIT 2"
  }
}
```

> There are much more possibilities and more subcommands available, like *query schema*, *query models*, and *query explain*.

Reviewer: "There are many more possibilities and additional subcommands available, such as ...."

[Add charset=utf-8 to Content-Type for static CSS and HTML files](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57188)  
*ActionDispatch::FileHandler#try_files* now appends *; charset=utf-8* to the Content-Type header for *CSS* and *HTML* static files.
This is consistent with the rest of the Rails stack, which already assumes UTF-8 in all possible places. 

[Add offline fallback page to the PWA scaffold](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57184)  
New Rails apps now include an *app/views/pwa/offline.html.erb* template and a commented *get "offline"* route, alongside the existing manifest and service worker. The service worker template also includes a commented example for caching and serving the offline page.

[Rewrite the Layouts and Rendering guide](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57152)  
New documentation pull request awaiting community review.

[Fix IO copy stream writing to Action Controller Live Buffer](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57190)  

> In addition return the number of bytes written from *write* method.

Reviewer: This is hard to understand IMO. "In addition" to what? I assume it's a continuation of the title but i think the body and title should be separate so you can read both in isolation, otherwise it's confusing.

[Fix reset_counters when using string IDs](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/57187)  

> Makes it consistent with other Active Record methods that already accepted string IDs.

Reviewer: Same here as above.
